\appendix

\section{Predictions from the integrated quantities}
\label{sect:motivation}

The major motivation for linking the growth of galaxies to the growth of their
central BH has arisen empirically from the strong correlations seen in their
integrated properties (the primary example being the tight \M{BH}--\M{*,bulge}
relation).  We therefore require an evolutionary model that suitably fits this
end point.  In the simplest case, where BHs and their host galaxy grow in
concert (or co-evolve), the relational form between their growth rates can be
easily predicted.  Given a functional form of the \M{BH}--\M{bulge,*} relation
described via

\begin{equation} \mathrm{log}_{10} M_{\mathrm{BH}} = \alpha \mathrm{log}_{10}
M_{\mathrm{bulge,*}} + \mathrm{log}_{10} \beta, \label{eq:slope1}
\end{equation}

\noindent where $\alpha$ is the gradient of the slope and $\mathrm{log}_{10}
\beta$ is the intercept, the predicted relation between the growth rates is
simply found by differentiating with respect to time, i.e,

\begin{equation} \mathrm{log}_{10} \dot M_{\mathrm{BH}} = \mathrm{log}_{10}
\dot M_{\mathrm{bulge,*}} + \mathrm{log}_{10} \beta + \mathrm{log}_{10} \alpha
+ (\alpha -1) \mathrm{log}_{10} M_{\mathrm{bulge,*}} .  \label{eq:slope2}
\end{equation}

\noindent In the trivial case where $\alpha = 1$ (i.e, a linear relation)
this reduces to

\begin{equation} \mathrm{log}_{10} \dot M_{\mathrm{BH}} = \mathrm{log}_{10}
\dot M_{\mathrm{*}} + \mathrm{log}_{10} \beta.  \label{eq:slope3}
\end{equation}

\noindent Within this scenario, growth rates are directly proportional to one
another scaled by the intercept, $\beta$, of the \M{BH}--\M{bulge,*} relation.
Therefore, if the functional form between the growth rates is described via

\begin{equation} \mathrm{log}_{10} \dot M_{\mathrm{BH}} = \gamma
\mathrm{log}_{10} \dot M_{*} + \mathrm{log}_{10} \delta, \label{eq:slope4}
\end{equation}

\noindent where again $\gamma$ and $\delta$ are the slope and intercept values,
we would expect $\delta = \beta$ and $\gamma = 1$ in the case where $\alpha =
1$.

Throughout this study we will test the hypothesis that there exists a broadly
linear co-evolution between galaxies and their central BHs, a plausible
scenario fitting the empirical \M{BH}--\M{*,bulge} relation. We refer
throughout to $\alpha$ as the gradient of the slope between the integrated
properties (\M{BH}--\M{*/bulge,*}) and to $\gamma$ as the slope between each
growth rate (\BHAR--\SFR), both in log space.
